Welcome back.
In this video I'm going to quickly introduce a topic called properties.
So first let me just demo this class.
It's called human and every human has a first class name and age.
Very straightforward.
All three are set in the net and there's no methods.
Let's say that I make a human called Jane and Jane is equal to human and her name is Jane capitalist's
that correctly and her last name is Goodall which I think has two elves and I don't know how old she
is.
She's 60 something that's be just say 50 because I want to upset anyone.
And that's great.
You know I can do things like print Jane dot age but I could also cause problems potentially by setting
age Jane that age is now equal to negative 100.
There's nothing stopping me from doing this.
And we kind of have we established that when we talked about class attributes and class methods and
we saw you know we had that type of for pet species thing that we'd set up and someone could go around
it like this if we don't want age to be negative.
We could do something in here where we check if age is greater than or equal to zero.
Self-taught age equals age else self-taught age equals zero.
Right and that's always going to set it if we set Jane's age to be negative nine here and then I print
her age that's run that we get zero.
So we're setting it to zero.
And this is not necessarily the best way of doing this.
We could use max and take whatever is larger between age and zero.
But let's just leave it at this.
The problem that properties can help us solve is that a user can just directly or code can directly
change age.
We don't really have any control over that.
What we can do is make use of something called a property and I'm going to show you a bunch of new syntax
first and it's going to change things a little bit.
So first of all I'm actually going to rename this here self that age to be self-taught underscore age
and this is our way of trying to signify to other developers.
This is private for this class.
It doesn't actually mean anything as we already mentioned but it signifies this is for internal use
in this class.
So you shouldn't be calling Jane out underscore age.
Now what we're going to do is set up a way of accessing age and changing underscore age.
We've already seen this we could define a method called I don't know def get age and then another one
called def set age like this and get age really simple just returned self-doubt underscore age and then
set age.
We need to take in a new age and then we'll just set self-doubt underscored age equals new age.
What we could do a little check like this.
If age if new age is greater than or equal to zero self-served underscore age equals New Age else let's
just set it to be zero again.
OK so this is what we know how to do this.
This is nothing new.
This is not involving properties.
For now try and print.
Age.
There's a problem there's nothing called age as we know there's only underscore age.
So what we would use instead is Jane datt get age and it's a method that we have to call it if we do
it now we should get zero.
And if we wanted to change the age let's do a set age and set age to be 45 and then print age again.
This is sort of the interface we've set up you use get aged to get the value of underscore age.
Again a developer could just call underscore age but the whole idea is that they're not supposed to
supposed to respect that.
So they go through get age and set age and does this work.
Yes.
Zero and then 45.
This is where properties come in.
So actually going to comment this out and then when it types some new code looks like this.
OK.
So here's the first part.
This acts as Geter as a getter like we had here with get age.
But what's cool about this.
So I have to write at property this is what's known as a decorator.
We have an entire section on decorator's later but it's a decorator that alters how this function works.
And this method is called age.
And what we've done is actually set up a property called age where you don't actually call this method
you don't have to call it age with parentheses.
I can now do this print Jane dot age as if it was an attribute on Jane and it did with like earlier
when we had self-taught age we were never actually setting self-taught age anywhere anywhere at all.
We're working with self-taught underscore age but this little bit of magic makes this work.
So now we get zero.
And if we change just to be 34 it's working.
So what's happening is this our property allows us to take the name of this method.
So whatever this is called We would then call down here and I don't need Perrins even though it's a
method here.
So it's really useful as a getter but even more so you could say as a setter and this is the syntax
for center reference at age dot setter as a decorator Then we define another method called age.
But this time it takes in a new value.
Let's just call it value and then this is where we do this sort of a check we would do if instead of
New-Age we'll call it value if value is positive self-talk underscore age equal to the new value else
set it to zero.
Or we could even raise a value error.
Age can't be negative.
OK.
So with these two here they're both called age two methods.
This one takes in a new value.
So with what we have now we've set up a center for age so that I can now do.
Jane datt age equals 20.
Then print Jane our age again afterwards we should see 34 and then 20 and there we go.
So what's cool about this is that we don't have to go through this route to get age and set age defining
those methods where we actually call them with parents like we did here.
Instead we've set up this property and we can just access directly Jane that age even though age is
really a proxy for underscore age internally.
And now if I try and change age to be negative 100 it prevents me from changing age.
So I kind of have this validation in there at this point that people would actually say this is a bit
on Pythonic.
And to wrap that up we've got our property and then whatever we put below it it's going to be the name
of that property so age is what we had here.
If I called this rage both of these needs to be raised as well as this and then down here Access Jane
dot rage and chained up rage would be accessing and manipulating underscore age.
So let me show one more.
We could make a property for get rid of the rage there fullname we could do at property def full name
self and then we could just have it return.
Self-taught First let's do an F string like this.
Self-taught first space self-taught last and now instead of calling a method fullname I can just call
print Jane dot full name and property let's see what we get.
Oh well this error is messing things up not getting to that point.
Try one more time.
There we go.
Full name is Jane Goodall and we could add a setter.
I will say this is kind of sketchy to do it this way in my opinion.
We would do at full name dot setter and then we define def full name self and then let's just call this
value let's just call this name so a user could specify Jane full name is now equal to Tim Minchin or
something like that.
And the reason that I don't really like this is that this would have side effects because we were going
to re-assign first and last based off of this.
So it looks something like this.
You do self-taught first Khama self-taught last equals named dot split on a space Paulist you split
on a space so name would be something like this.
We split it in half on the boat not exactly in half.
We split it on the space.
This is going to be assigned to self-doubt first.
This is assigned to self-taught last.
Like I said this is kind of sketchy because you're setting this property for name and it's changing
to other attributes and I don't know I wouldn't do this personally but I'm putting it in here just as
an example that it does work.
So if we did Jane the full name is to mention let's do a print Jane dot dict Dunder dict and print that
out.
You can see with the actual values we've got first.
Now Tim last is now mentioned underscore age is 20.
So full name is not in here.
Full name is a property we set up that is interacting with first and last just like age is not in there
either only underscore ages.
It's an interface that we've created to interact with these.
Like I said this maybe not the best example but I just wanted to show you two full properties that both
have a getter and a center.
And the syntax at property than the name of the property.
And then you return whatever value you want to be returned.
Then we do the name of the property with an at sign dot center and then a method with the exact same
name.
And this one takes in a new value and then we can you know do some sort of validation or check something
and then we update whatever we want in here.
In our case we're working with underscore age and we did the same thing down here for full name.
So those are properties.
It's just a nice bit of syntactic sugar so that we can access things like Jane that age instead of having
to do.
Jane don't get age like we had a peer but always remember that a user could just type Jane.
Underscore age and circumvent all of this so it all comes down to developers respecting what you know
code and what's been written by other developers.
Otherwise these properties are meaningless.
If we can just go around them and that's the point.
That's how Python is set up without having private methods or private attributes.
It just comes down to following conventions anyway.
That's properties.